# Parser Generator: Jison
Jison, as described by the official website:

> Jison takes a context-free grammar as input and outputs a JavaScript file
> capable of parsing the language described by that grammar.

So, there are tools which makes a parser for you and here you are, making it on
your own. Well, you have to crawl before you walk! It's like when you learn
[L'HÃ´pital](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%27H%C3%B4pital%27s_rule) in Calculus
(ignore my bad jokes if you've never taken that class before).

Jison is a Javascript port of an old tool for C which does the same called
Bison. Give it a context-free grammar and it will generate a parser for us,
pretty awesome! There are some limitations though, it doesn't parse a grammar if
it has some kind of ambiguity, but we can remove it by using presedence rules or
making some change to our rules.

For now let's see an example Jison grammar so we see the syntax:

    /* lexical grammar, tokenizer */
    %lex

    %%

    /* token definitions, for example: */
    " "+                    /* skip whitespace */
    \d+(\.\d+)?             return 'NUMBER';
    [a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9_]*   return 'IDENTIFIER';
    \"(?:[^\"]|\.)*\"       return 'STRING';

    /* end of tokenizer */
    /lex

    /* define starting rule for our grammar */
    %start Program

    %%

    /* define grammar rules, for now a simple example which only matches numbers */

    Program
        : StatementList EOF
            { return $1 }
        ;

    StatementList
        : Statement StatementList
            { $$ = $1.concat([$2]); }
        | Statement
            { $$ = [$1]; }
        ;

    Statement
        : NUMBER
            { $$ = Number(yytext); }
        ;

As you can see, the format is

    RuleName
        : (TOKEN or RuleName)*
          { return value }
        ;

A rule can have several possible options, for example, we could create a
`Terminal` rule which matches a `STRING` token, a `NUMBER` token or an
`IDENTIFIER` token.

    Terminal
      : STRING
      | NUMBER
      | IDENTIFIER
      ;

Now that we know how to define Jison grammars, let's make a grammar and make all
our old tests from the hand-made grammar pass. We'll build the same AST but for
each node we'll use a `TYPE` property instead of `NAME` as using the latter
might make things a bit confusing sometimes.

You can see the full grammar [at the GitHub
repository](https://github.com/gosukiwi/creatingaproglang-src/blob/v0.3/src/grammar.jison),
in order to transform a grammar into a Javascript file we can use we'll need to
install and run Jison:

    npm install -g jison
    jison grammar.jison

Easy enough! Once we have our `grammar.js` file we can simply include it and use
the parser as needed:
    
    var parser = require('grammar.js').parser;
    var ast = parser.parse('a = 1');

You might notice some strange names in the grammar's return values, these are
predefined Jison variables we use to return and get data.

    $$:     The value of this variable will be the return value of the rule
    $1:     The value of the first match of the rule
    $2:     The value of the second match of the rule
    $n:     The value of the nth match of the rule
    yytext: The full text matched by the rule

Take your time and play around with the grammar, if you want, you can try
writing it yourself or making some toy grammars to get the hang of it. Once you
get used to it, it allows you to make complex parsers really quickly!

## Implementing IF
Let's implement the `IF` statement yet again.

## Alternatives
Jison isn't the only parser generator out there, for Javascript there's
[PEG.js](http://pegjs.majda.cz/) which doesn't parse context-free grammars but
it parses a subset of them, it parses grammars without left-side recursion,
meaning rules like

  Expression
    : Expression OPERATOR Expression

Wont work, that's because precedence is set by using the Grammar rules in order
to make the grammar not ambiguos.

For other languages there are other alternatives of course, C beeing the oldest
and most solid one, it has [Bison](http://www.gnu.org/software/bison/), Ruby has
[Racc](http://i.loveruby.net/en/projects/racc/doc/usage.html) and Python has
[PLY](http://www.dabeaz.com/ply/). 

Some languages such as PHP don't have any parser generator out there as the time
of this writing, but most languages do, you are just a google search away from
them if you are interested!

